# TMVOC

Table 28. Primary Variables of TMVOC

<table data-header-hidden><thead><tr><th width="138"></th><th width="74"></th><th width="70"></th><th width="86"></th><th width="81"></th><th width="84"></th><th width="76"></th><th width="75"></th><th width="77"></th><th width="75"></th><th width="79"></th><th width="75"></th><th></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>Phase Conditions</td><td>PrV1</td><td>PrV2</td><td>PrV3</td><td>PrV4</td><td>PsV5</td><td>PrV6</td><td>PrV7</td><td>PrV8</td><td>PrV9</td><td>PrV10</td><td>PrV11</td><td>PrV12</td></tr><tr><td>Gas</td><td>Pg</td><td>Xg1</td><td>Xg2</td><td>Xg3</td><td>Xh1</td><td>Xh2</td><td>Xh3</td><td>Xh4</td><td>Xtr1</td><td>Xtr2</td><td>Xtr3</td><td>T</td></tr><tr><td>Aqueous</td><td>Pa</td><td>Xg1</td><td>Xg2</td><td>Xg3</td><td>Xh1</td><td>Xh2</td><td>Xh3</td><td>Xh4</td><td>Xtr1</td><td>Xtr2</td><td>Xtr3</td><td>T</td></tr><tr><td>Oil</td><td>Po</td><td>Xg1</td><td>Xg2</td><td>Xg3</td><td>Xh1</td><td>Xh2</td><td>Xh3</td><td>Xh4</td><td>Xtr1</td><td>Xtr2</td><td>Xtr3</td><td>T</td></tr><tr><td>Aqueous-Gas</td><td>Pg</td><td>Sg</td><td>Xg2g</td><td>Xg3g</td><td>Xh1g</td><td>Xh2g</td><td>Xh3g</td><td>Xh4g</td><td>Xtr1</td><td>Xtr2</td><td>Xtr3</td><td>T</td></tr><tr><td>Oil-Gas</td><td>Pg</td><td>Sg</td><td>Xg2g</td><td>Xg3g</td><td>Xh1g</td><td>Xh2g</td><td>Xh3g</td><td>Xh4g</td><td>Xtr1</td><td>Xtr2</td><td>Xtr3</td><td>T</td></tr><tr><td>Aqueous-Oil</td><td>Po</td><td>So</td><td>Xg2o</td><td>Xg3o</td><td>Xh1o</td><td>Xh2o</td><td>Xh3o</td><td>Xh4o</td><td>Xtr1</td><td>Xtr2</td><td>Xtr3</td><td>T</td></tr><tr><td>Three Phases</td><td>Pg</td><td>Sg</td><td>Xg2g</td><td>Xg3g</td><td>Xh1g</td><td>Xh2g</td><td>Xh3g</td><td>Sa</td><td>Xtr1</td><td>Xtr2</td><td>Xtr3</td><td>T</td></tr></tbody></table>

Table 28 shows the parameters of default initial conditions for TMVOC. In the table, Pg, Pa and po are pressure for gas, aqueous oil phase respectively. Xtrn is the tracer/solvent _n_ mole fraction in the aqueous phase. T is temperature. Sg, Sa, and So are saturations for gas, aqueous oil phase respectively. Xgn is the gas _n_ mole fraction in the existing phase.  Xgng and Xgno are the gas _n_ mole fractions in gas and oil phase respectively. Xhn is the hydrocarbon _n_ mole fraction in the existing phase.  Xhng and Xhno are the hydrocarbon _n_ mole fractions in gas and oil phase respectively.&#x20;

The number of gases, hydrocarbons, and tracers are flexible by user selection. In the current version of TMVOC, the maximum allowed mass components is 20, which means the sum of the number of gases, hydrocarbons, tracers, and water must be not more than 20. The tracer number has an upper limitation of 5. Table 15 shows a specific case of 3 gases, 4 hydrocarbons, and 3 tracers/solvents. No matter what the number of different types of mass components are, the primary variables are always arranged in the same way. In general, for single phase condition, the first primary variable is pressure, followed by mole fraction for all the gases, hydrocarbons, and tracers in a specific phase, and the last primary variable is always the temperature. For the two- or three-phase condition, the second primary variable (mole fraction of the first gas) is replaced by the gas/oil saturation (Sg or So). For the three-phase condition, the primary variable for the mole fraction of the last hydrocarbon is replaced by water saturation (Sa).&#x20;

User can use other set parameters as the initial conditions through initCType in input data record MODDE.1 or command line –i \<parameter>

initCType =

&#x20;                   “TMVOC”         reading the TOUGH3/TMVOC input files.
