# Problem 2 - Heat Sweep in a Vertical Fracture (rvf)

In many geothermal fields there is evidence of rapid migration of injected fluids along preferential flow paths, presumably along fractures. The present problem is designed to study thermal interference along such paths, by modeling nonisothermal injection into and production from a single vertical fracture, as illustrated in Figure 3 (from Pruess and Bodvarsson, 1984). The fracture is bounded by semi-infinite half-spaces of impermeable rock, which provide a conductive heat supply. Initial temperature is 300 ˚C throughout. Water at 100 ˚C temperature is injected at one side of the fracture at a constant rate of 4 kg/s, while production occurs at the other side against a specified wellbore pressure. Problem parameters are given in Table 2, and the TOUGH3 input file for injecting at point I and producing at point P is shown in Figure 4.

A special feature of the problem is that the semi-analytical method is used to describe heat conduction in the confining layers (see section 4.4 in TOUGH3 User’s Guide), reducing the dimensionality of the problem from 3-D to 2-D. This feature is invoked by setting MOP(15) = 1. Water remains in single-phase liquid conditions throughout, so that no data block RPCAP for relative permeabilities and capillary pressures is needed. The input file as given in Figure 4 includes a SOLVR data block, selecting the stabilized bi-conjugate gradient solver DLUSTB (MATSLV = 5) with Z1 preconditioning. Other solvers could be used for this problem, but the particular solver and preconditioner combination was chosen because it is robust enough to be able to handle a “two waters” variation of the problem. The problem is run in three separate segments. A first run performs mesh generation only, using the MESHMaker/XYZ module. For this run, the data records from MESHM through ENDFI in the input file are inserted right behind the first record with the problem title. The mesh consists of 12 horizontal by 10 vertical blocks of 20 m x 20 m. Ordinarily, we would specify NX = 12 and NZ = 10 to make such a mesh; however, special considerations arise here because we desire appropriate surface areas for heat conduction to be placed in the MESH file. By default, in the MESHMaker/XYZ module the interface areas with impermeable confining beds are always taken to be in the X-Y plane, so that in a mesh with vertical Z-axis the interface areas for conductive heat transfer would be assigned to the top and bottom boundaries. To properly assign the desired lateral heat transfer areas, the mesh is generated as an X-Y mesh (NX = 12, NY = 10, NZ = 1), and the Y-axis is specified to make an angle of 90˚ with the horizontal, i.e., to point in the vertical direction. The MESHMAKER input terminates on ENDFI, to bypass the flow simulation and to limit processing to mesh generation only.
